+++
title = "JOSS re-evaluated as JUFO 1 in Finland, expands its definition"

[extra]

author = "Frankie Robertson"
+++

The [Finnish Publication Forum](https://julkaisufoorumi.fi/) (JUFO) has re-evaluated the [Journal of Open Source Software](https://joss.theoj.org/) (JOSS) as level 1, making it easier fo researchers to get credit for their software contributions within the Finnish academic system. Among other things, the re-evaluation will make it easier for Finnish PhD students to include JOSS publications in article-based dissertations.

The re-evaluation followed a modification of JUFO level 1, adding the criteria to include data and methods supporting research results. This change paves the way for further recognition of scientific work beyond, and in addition to, traditional scientific publications.

JUFO levels are important within the Finnish academic system. The Finnish Publication forum (Finnish: Julkaisufoorumi; JUFO) ranks publication channels on a 0-3 level, with 1 indicating basic level channels up to and 3 which is reserved for the most selective channels. JOSS's previous ranking of 0 indicated publication channels that are not considered to meet basic criteria such as primarily publishing scientific output and having a proper editorial and peer-review process. Since 2015, the classification has been used to measure the research output of universities, and around 14% of all of Finland's universities' basic funding is based on the number of publications during the year, and their JUFO level. Naturally, this means that the value of publications in Finland is inevitably linked with their JUFO level.

The Journal of Open Source Software (JOSS) is a diamond open-access software journal. Software package authors can submit short articles describing their software. The journal uses an open peer-review process which focusses on also improving the quality of the software itself such as ensuring it has adequate automated testing and documentation, and that it behaves as described.

Members of Nordic-RSE helped to escalate the issue, although the process was not always easy, with proposals to re-evaluate the journal from those involved with Nordic-RSE dating back to at least 2020. "Persistence and open, apologetic debate with the Publication Forum was a key part of the process" says Frankie Robertson, currently at the University of Jyväskylä. Through the continued efforts of Luca Ferranti, currently at Aalto University, the issue was brought up multiple times, and eventually escalated to a steering group meeting, resulting in a decision to modify the definition of JUFO 1 in the handbook given to JUFO's evaluation panels to include publication channels which include data and methods (Finnish: menetelmät ja aineistot) supporting research results, in addition to research results themselves. ([The relevant meeting minutes are available (in Finnish) here.](https://julkaisufoorumi.fi/sites/default/files/2024-12/Julkaisufoorumin%20ohjausryhm%C3%A4n%20p%C3%B6yt%C3%A4kirja%209.12.2024.pdf))

The change helps to bring JUFO guidelines in line with recommendations made by the Finnish National Board on Research Integrity (TENK). In particular, the [policy for open research data and methods](https://doi.org/10.23847/tsv.669), where principle 3 states that, "The researcher's merits in the promotion of good data management, work related to research data and methods, and the appropriate opening of research data and methods are valued and can support the researcher’s career".
